Updated iOS (MSTG-RESILIENCE-9) (#1712)
OWASP/owasp-mstg: Document/0x06j-Testing-Resiliency-Against-Reverse-Engineering.md

#### Control Flow Flattening

Control flow flattening replaces original code with a more complex representation. The transformation breaks the body of a function into basic blocks and puts them all inside a single infinite loop with a switch statement that controls the program flow. This makes the program flow significantly harder to follow because it removes the natural conditional constructs that usually make the code easier to read.

![control-flow-flattening](./Images/Chapters/0x06j/control-flow-flattening.png)

The image shows how control flow flattening alters code (see "[Obfuscating C++ programs via control flow flattening](http://ac.inf.elte.hu/Vol_030_2009/003.pdf)")

> #### Dead code injection

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Dead Code Injection
```

This technique makes the program's control flow more complex by injecting dead code into the program. Dead code is a stub of code that doesn’t affect the original program’s behaviour but increases the overhead for the reverse engineering process.

> #### String encryption

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### String Encryption
```

#### Overview

Obfuscation is a process of transforming code into a form that is difficult to disassemble and understand and is an integral part of every software protection scheme. The application preserves the original functionality after obfuscation. What's important to understand is that obfuscation isn't something that can be simply turned on or off. Programs can be made incomprehensible, in whole or in part, in many ways and to different degrees.

> Note: All presented techniques below may not stop reverse engineers, but combining all of those techniques will make their job significantly harder. The aim of those techniques is to discourage reverse engineers from further analysis.

#### Obfuscation Techniques

The following techniques can be used to obfuscate an application:

> - Name obfuscation of classes, methods and fields

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Name obfuscation
```

> - Instructions substitution

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Instruction substitution
```

- Control flow flattening
- Dead code injection
- String encryption

> #### Name obfuscation of classes, methods and fields

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Name Obfuscation
```

> The standard compiler generates binary symbols based on class and function names from the source code. Therefore, symbol names remain meaningful and can be easily read by disassembling the application. For instance, a function which detects a jailbreak can be located by searching for relevant keywords inside the binary. The listing below shows the disassembled function *JailbreakDetectionViewController.jailbreakTest4Tapped(..)* from the app Damn Vulnerable iOS App Version 2 (DVIA-v2).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The standard compiler generates binary symbols based on class and function names from the source code. Therefore, if no obfuscation was applied, symbol names remain meaningful and can be easily read straight from the app binary. For instance, a function which detects a jailbreak can be located by searching for relevant keywords (e.g. "jailbreak"). The listing below shows the disassembled function `JailbreakDetectionViewController.jailbreakTest4Tapped` from the Damn Vulnerable iOS App (DVIA-v2).
```

```assembly
__T07DVIA_v232JailbreakDetectionViewControllerC20jailbreakTest4TappedyypF:
stp        x22, x21, [sp, #-0x30]!
mov        rbp, rsp
```

After the obfuscation we can observe that the symbol’s name is no longer meaningful as shown on the listing below.

```assembly
__T07DVIA_v232zNNtWKQptikYUBNBgfFVMjSkvRdhhnbyyFySbyypF:
stp        x22, x21, [sp, #-0x30]!
mov        rbp, rsp
```

> Nevertheless, the binary’s code is not modified, so an attacker can still retrieve the logic of the algorithm by reading the disassembled version of the function and understand its purpose.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Nevertheless, this only applies to the names of functions, classes and fields. The actual code remains unmodified, so an attacker can still read the disassembled version of the function and try to understand its purpose (e.g. to retrieve the logic of a security algorithm).
```

> #### Instructions substitution

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Instruction Substitution
```

> This technique replaces standard binary operators like addition or subtraction with more complex representations. For example an addition `x = a + b` can be represented as `x = -(-a) - (-b)`. However, using the same replacement representation could be easily reversed, so it is recommended to add multiple substitution techniques for a single case and introduce a random factor. Nevertheless, this technique is vulnerable to de-obfuscation, but it can still be time consuming depending on the complexity and depth of the substitutions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This technique replaces standard binary operators like addition or subtraction with more complex representations. For example an addition `x = a + b` can be represented as `x = -(-a) - (-b)`. However, using the same replacement representation could be easily reversed, so it is recommended to add multiple substitution techniques for a single case and introduce a random factor. This technique is vulnerable to deobfuscation, but depending on the complexity and depth of the substitutions, applying it can still be time consuming.
```

#### Control Flow Flattening

> Control Flow Flattening replaces original code with a more complex representation. The transformation breaks the body of the function into basic blocks and puts them all inside a single infinite loop with a switch statement that controls the program flow. This makes the program flow significantly harder to follow because the natural conditional constructs that made the code easier to read are now gone.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Control flow flattening replaces original code with a more complex representation. The transformation breaks the body of a function into basic blocks and puts them all inside a single infinite loop with a switch statement that controls the program flow. This makes the program flow significantly harder to follow because it removes the natural conditional constructs that usually make the code easier to read.
```

![control-flow-flattening](./Images/Chapters/0x06j/control-flow-flattening.png)

> The image shows how the control-flow flattening alters code ([Obfuscating C++ programs via control flow flattening](http://ac.inf.elte.hu/Vol_030_2009/003.pdf))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The image shows how control flow flattening alters code (see "[Obfuscating C++ programs via control flow flattening](http://ac.inf.elte.hu/Vol_030_2009/003.pdf)")
```

#### Dead code injection

> This technique makes the program's control-flow more complex by injecting dead code into the program. Dead code is a stub of code that doesn’t affect the original program’s behaviour but increases the overhead for the reverse engineering process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This technique makes the program's control flow more complex by injecting dead code into the program. Dead code is a stub of code that doesn’t affect the original program’s behaviour but increases the overhead for the reverse engineering process.
```

#### String encryption

> Applications are often compiled with hardcoded keys, licences, tokens and URL endpoints. By default, all of them are stored in plaintext in the data section of an application’s binary. String encryption aims to replace these values with their encrypted forms and inject stubs of code into the program that decrypts data before it is used by the program.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Applications are often compiled with hardcoded keys, licences, tokens and endpoint URLs. By default, all of them are stored in plaintext in the data section of an application’s binary. This technique encrypts these values and injects stubs of code into the program that will decrypt that data before it is used by the program.
```

> #### Recommended tools

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Recommended Tools
```

> - [SwiftShield](https://github.com/rockbruno/swiftshield) can be used to obfuscate binary's symbols. It reads the source code of the Xcode project and replaces all names of classes, methods and fields with random values before the compiler is used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [SwiftShield](https://github.com/rockbruno/swiftshield) can be used to perform name obfuscation. It reads the source code of the Xcode project and replaces all names of classes, methods and fields with random values before the compiler is used.
```

> - [obfuscator-llvm](https://github.com/obfuscator-llvm) operates on the Intermediate Representation instead of the the source code. It can be used for symbols obfuscation, string encryption and control-flow flattening. Since it's based on IR, it can hide out significantly more information about the application as compared to SwiftShield.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [obfuscator-llvm](https://github.com/obfuscator-llvm) operates on the Intermediate Representation (IR) instead of the source code. It can be used for symbol obfuscation, string encryption and control flow flattening. Since it's based on IR, it can hide out significantly more information about the application as compared to SwiftShield.
```

#### Overview

> Obfuscation is a process of transforming the original algorithms, data structures into a form that is difficult to disassemble and understand but the program after the modification preserves the original functionality. Both code and data can be obfuscated, so that an attacker can mostly rely on dynamic analysis.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Obfuscation is a process of transforming code into a form that is difficult to disassemble and understand and is an integral part of every software protection scheme. The application preserves the original functionality after obfuscation. What's important to understand is that obfuscation isn't something that can be simply turned on or off. Programs can be made incomprehensible, in whole or in part, in many ways and to different degrees. 
```

Let's talk about code in general and make it more generic. 

I would also suggest to keep the original last two sentences. Just because obfuscation is used doesn't mean that you need to rely mostly on dynamic analysis. It highly depends on the degree of usage of obfuscation and what your use case is to RE an app.

> Note: All presented techniques below may not stop reverse engineers, but combining all of those techniques will make their job significantly harder. The aim of those techniques is to discourage reverse engineers from further analysis.

#### Obfuscation Techniques

> The following techniques can be used to obfuscate an application:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following techniques can be used to obfuscate an application:

```

Need always a newline before listings.

- Name obfuscation of classes, methods and fields
- Instructions substitution
- Control flow flattening
- Dead code injection
- String encryption

#### Name obfuscation of classes, methods and fields

> The standard compiler generates binary’s symbols based on class and function names from the source code. Therefore, symbol names remain meaningful and can be easily read by disassembling the application. For instance, a function which detects a jailbreak can be located by searching for relevant keywords inside the binary. The listing below shows the disassembled function *JailbreakDetectionViewController.jailbreakTest4Tapped(..)* from DVIA-v2 app.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The standard compiler generates binary symbols based on class and function names from the source code. Therefore, symbol names remain meaningful and can be easily read by disassembling the application. For instance, a function which detects a jailbreak can be located by searching for relevant keywords inside the binary. The listing below shows the disassembled function *JailbreakDetectionViewController.jailbreakTest4Tapped(..)* from the app Damn Vulnerable iOS App Version 2 (DVIA-v2).
```

```assembly
__T07DVIA_v232JailbreakDetectionViewControllerC20jailbreakTest4TappedyypF:
stp        x22, x21, [sp, #-0x30]!
mov        rbp, rsp
```

After the obfuscation we can observe that the symbol’s name is no longer meaningful as shown on the listing below.

```assembly
__T07DVIA_v232zNNtWKQptikYUBNBgfFVMjSkvRdhhnbyyFySbyypF:
stp        x22, x21, [sp, #-0x30]!
mov        rbp, rsp
```

> Nevertheless, the binary’s code is not modified, so an attacker can still retrieve the logic of the algorithm by reading the disassembled version of the function and figure out its purpose.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Nevertheless, the binary’s code is not modified, so an attacker can still retrieve the logic of the algorithm by reading the disassembled version of the function and understand its purpose.
```

#### Instructions substitution

> This technique replaces standard binary operators like addition, subtraction with more complex representations. For example an addition `x = a + b` can be represented as `x = -(-a) - (-b)`. However, using the same replacement representation could be easily reversed, so it is recommended to add multiple substitution techniques for a single case and introduce a random factor. Nevertheless, this technique is vulnerable to code re-optimaliztion.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This technique replaces standard binary operators like addition or subtraction with more complex representations. For example an addition `x = a + b` can be represented as `x = -(-a) - (-b)`. However, using the same replacement representation could be easily reversed, so it is recommended to add multiple substitution techniques for a single case and introduce a random factor. Nevertheless, this technique is vulnerable to de-obfuscation, but it can still be time consuming depending on the complexity and depth of the substitutions.
```

> #### Control flow Flattering

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Control Flow Flattening

```

We need to keep these line breaks, for the markdown lint check

> Control flow Flattening replaces original code with a more complex representation. The transformation breaks the body of the function into basic blocks and puts them all inside a single infinite loop with a switch statement that controls the program flow. This makes the program flow significantly harder to follow because the natural conditional constructs that made the code easier to read are now gone.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Control Flow Flattening replaces original code with a more complex representation. The transformation breaks the body of the function into basic blocks and puts them all inside a single infinite loop with a switch statement that controls the program flow. This makes the program flow significantly harder to follow because the natural conditional constructs that made the code easier to read are now gone.
```

> 

Reviewer 2: Please have only one newline, due to the markdown linter check

![control-flow-flattening](./Images/Chapters/0x06j/control-flow-flattening.png)

The image shows how the control-flow flattening alters code ([Obfuscating C++ programs via control flow flattening](http://ac.inf.elte.hu/Vol_030_2009/003.pdf))

#### Dead code injection

> This technique makes the program's control-flow more complex by injecting dead code into the program. Dead code is a stub of code that doesn’t affect the original program’s behaviour but brings the overhead for the reverse engineering.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This technique makes the program's control-flow more complex by injecting dead code into the program. Dead code is a stub of code that doesn’t affect the original program’s behaviour but increases the overhead for the reverse engineering process.
```

#### String encryption

Applications are often compiled with hardcoded keys, licences, tokens and URL endpoints. By default, all of them are stored in plaintext in the *data section* of an application’s binary. String encryption aims to replace these values with their encrypted forms and inject stubs of code into the program that decrypts data before it is used by the program. 

#### Recommended tools

> * [SwiftShield](https://github.com/rockbruno/swiftshield) can be used to obfuscate binary's symbols. It reads the source code of the XCODE project and replaces all names of classes, methods and fields with random values before the compiler is used.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* [SwiftShield](https://github.com/rockbruno/swiftshield) can be used to obfuscate binary's symbols. It reads the source code of the Xcode project and replaces all names of classes, methods and fields with random values before the compiler is used.
```

> * [obfuscator-llvm](https://github.com/obfuscator-llvm) operates on the Intermediate Representation instead of the the source code. It can be used for symbols obfuscation, string encryption and control-flow flattening. Since it's based on IR, it can hide out significantly more information about the application as compared to SwiftShield.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* [obfuscator-llvm](https://github.com/obfuscator-llvm/obfuscator/tree/llvm-4.0 "obfuscator-llvm) operates on the Intermediate Representation (IR) instead of the the source code. It can be used for symbols obfuscation, string encryption and control-flow flattening. Since it's based on IR, it can hide out significantly more information about the application as compared to SwiftShield.
```

Did you try out obfuscator-llvm? This project hasn't been updated for 3. years.

Author: Hey @sushi2k. Thanks for the review! I haven't tested _obfuscator-llvm_ myself but I rather wanted to point out a compiler based solutions here. It seems to work based on XODE plugins which are no longer supported in newer versions of XCODE but there is a [Hikari](https://github.com/HikariObfuscator/Hikari) that does pretty similar job using  xcode-toolchain. Should we add a sentence about it?

Reviewer 2: Hey @serek8. Noted and thanks for pointing out Hikari.  Yes, please mention it also, it is actively maintained.

Reviewer 2: After adding, we are good to go from my side. Thanks for the enhancement, really good work!
